To actually be able to perform speech recognition special statistical models need to be acquired. These models are usually trained on tons of data which is normally hard to acquire, i.e. they cost lots of money. Several models are required for any speech recognition application:

  * Acoustic Model is necessary for the recognition of the basic phonetic units. This is hardest to procure, since it requires hours of recorded and annotated speech. Fortunately, a group of people created an opensource project on the website http://www.voxforge.org where volunteers record and annotate all the necessary data. Go there and check out the details. Record your own voice while you're there.
  * Phonetic Lexicon or Phonetizer is needed to convert these phonemes into words. This is not hard to find lying around the net and depending on the vocabulary we want to recognize, it's not hard to make one yourself.
  * Grammars are needed to define which sequences of words are allowed and which aren't. These are easy to make on your own using the tools available in the Julius package.
  * Language Models are sometimes used instead of grammars to determine word sequences. LMs allow the users to speak naturally using a predetermined vocabulary instead of just saying commands, which is the case when using grammars. If you want to make a transcription system, you need LMs. LMs are trained on huge amounts of text (millions of words and more). They are the speech recognizers' greatest weakness, so it's unlikely we will use them soon.

On the VoxForge site, you can download the newest acoustic models from the download section.  You can also download a "quickstart" package with Julius ASR and some example grammars included. If you want to test the package with the Android App make sure you download the patched version of Julius from the download section here.